The following is a conversation with Judea Pearl,
a professor at UCLA and a winner of the Touring Award
that's generally recognized as the Nobel Prize of Computing.
He's one of the seminal figures in the field of artificial intelligence,
computer science, and statistics. He has developed and championed
probabilistic approaches to AI, including Beijing networks,
and profound ideas and causality in general. These ideas are important not
just to AI, but to our understanding and practice of science.
But in the field of AI, the idea of causality, cause and effect,
to many, lie at the core of what is currently missing
and will must be developed in order to build truly intelligent systems.
For this reason, and many others, his work is worth returning to
often. I recommend his most recent book called Book of Why that presents key
ideas from a lifetime of work in a way that is accessible to the general public.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it,
subscribe on YouTube, give it 5 stars on Apple Podcasts,
support on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter.
Alex Friedman, spelled F R I D M A N. If you leave a review on Apple Podcasts
especially, but also Cast Box or comment on YouTube,
consider mentioning topics, people, ideas, questions, quotes, and science, tech, and
philosophy that you find interesting, and I'll read them on this podcast.
I won't call out names, but I love comments with kindness and thoughtfulness in them,
so I thought I'd share them with you. Someone on YouTube highlighted a quote
from the conversation with Noam Chomsky, where he said that the
significance of your life is something you create. I like this line as well.
On most days, the existentialist approach to life is one I find
liberating and fulfilling. I recently started doing ads at the
end of the introduction. I'll do one or two minutes after introducing
the episode and never any ads in the middle that break the flow of the
conversation. I hope that works for you and doesn't
hurt the listening experience. This show is presented by Cash App,
the number one finance app in the App Store. I personally use Cash App to
have money to friends, but you can also use it to buy,
sell, and deposit Bitcoin in just seconds. Cash App also has a new investing
feature. You can buy fractions of a stock,
say $1 worth, no matter what the stock price is.
Brokerage services are provided by Cash App Investing, a subsidiary of Square,
and member SIPC. I'm excited to be working with Cash App to
support one of my favorite organizations called First, best known for their first
robotics and Lego competitions. They educate and inspire hundreds of
thousands of students in over 110 countries and have a
perfect rating on charity navigator, which means the
donated money is used to the maximum effectiveness.
When you get Cash App from the App Store, Google Play,
and use code LEX Podcast, you'll get $10 and Cash App will also donate $10
to FIRST, which again is an organization that I've
personally seen inspire girls and boys to dream of engineering a better world.
And now, here's my conversation with Judea Pearl.
You mentioned in an interview that science is not a collection of facts
by constant human struggle with the mysteries of nature.
What was the first mystery that you can recall that hooked you,
that kept you in the creos... Oh, the first mystery, that's a good one.
Yeah, I remember that. I had a fever for three days.
When I learned about Descartes Analytical Geometry,
and I found out that you can do all the construction in geometry using algebra,
and I couldn't get over it. I simply couldn't get out of bed.
What kind of world does Analytical Geometry unlock?
Well, it connects algebra with geometry.
Okay, so Descartes had the idea that geometrical construction
and geometrical theorems and assumptions can be articulated in the language of
algebra, which means that all the proof that we did in high
school trying to prove that the three bisectors
meet at one point and that, okay, all these can be proven
by just shuffling around notation. Yeah, that was a traumatic experience.
Traumatic experience. For me, it was. I'm telling you.
It's the connection between the different mathematical disciplines that they all
noted between two different languages.
Languages. Yeah. So which mathematics discipline is most beautiful? Is
geometry it for you? Both are beautiful. They have almost the same
power. But there's a visual element to geometry
being a visual. It's more transparent. But once you get over
to algebra, then the linear equation is a straight
line. This translation is easily absorbed.
And to pass a tangent to a circle, you know, you have the basic theorems
and you can do it with algebra. So but the transition from one to another
was really, I thought that the card was the greatest
mathematician of all times. So you have been at the, if you think of
engineering and mathematics as a spectrum. Yes.
You have been, you have walked casually along this spectrum
throughout your, throughout your life. You know, a little bit of engineering and
then, you know, a bit done a little bit of
mathematics here and there. Not a little bit. I mean, we got a very solid
background in mathematics because our teachers were geniuses.
Our teachers came from Germany in the 1930s running away from Hitler.
They left their careers in Heidelberg and Berlin and came to teach high school
in Israel. And we were the beneficiary of that experiment.
So I, and they taught us math the good way. What's a good way to teach math?
Chronologically. The people. The people behind the theorems.
Yeah. Their cousins and their nieces and their faces.
And how they jumped from the bathtub when they screamed Eureka
and ran naked in town. So you're almost educated as a historian of
math. No, we just got a glimpse of that history
together with the theorem. So every exercise in math was connected with the
person and the time of the person. The period.
The period also mathematically. Mathematically speaking, yes. Not the
politics. No. So, and then in, in university,
you have, you've gone on to do engineering. Yeah. I got a B.S. in engineering and a
Technion. Right. And then I moved here for
graduate work. And I got to, I did engineering
in addition to physics in Radges. And it would combine very nicely with my
thesis which I did in LCA laboratories and superconductivity.
And then somehow thought to switch to almost computer science, software, even,
even not switch but long to become, to get into
software engineering a little bit. Yes.
Programming, if you can call it that in the 70s. So there's all these disciplines.
Yeah. If you were to pick a favor, what,
in terms of engineering and mathematics, which path do you think
has more beauty, which path has more power? It's hard to choose, no.
I enjoy doing physics. I even have a vortex named on my name.
So I have investment in immortality.
So what is a vortex? Vortex is in superconductivity.
In the superconductivity. You have permanent currents swirling around.
One way or the other, you can have a store one or zero
for a computer. That's what we worked on in the 1960s in LCA.
And I discovered a few nice phenomena with the vortices.
They pushed current and they moved. So that's a pearl vortex.
Pearl vortex, right? You can google it. Right?
I didn't know about it, but the physicists picked up on my thesis
on my PhD thesis and it becomes popular. I mean thin film superconductors
became important for high temperature superconductors.
So they call it pearl vortex without my knowledge.
I discovered it only about 15 years ago. You have footprints in all of the
sciences. So let's talk about the universe a little bit.
Is the universe at the lowest level deterministic or stochastic
in your amateur philosophy view? Put another way, does God play dice?
We know it is stochastic, right? Today. Today we think it is stochastic.
Yes. We think because we have the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle and we have some experiments to
confirm that. All we have is experiments to confirm it.
We don't understand why. Why is already...
You wrote a book about why. Yeah, it's a puzzle.
It's a puzzle that you have the dice flipping machine or God
and the result of the flipping
propagates with the speed faster than the speed of light.
We can't explain it, okay? But it only governs microscopic phenomena.
So you don't think of quantum mechanics as useful
for understanding the nature of reality? No, diversionary.
So in your thinking the world might as well be deterministic? The world is
deterministic and as far as the new one firing is concerned
it is deterministic to first approximation. What about free will?
Free will is also a nice exercise. Free will is an illusion
that we AI people are going to solve. So what do you think once we solve it that
solution will look like? Once we put it in the page?
First of all it will look like a machine.
A machine that acts as though it has free will.
It communicates with other machines as though they have
free will and you wouldn't be able to tell the difference between
a machine that does and machine that doesn't have free will.
So the illusion, it propagates the illusion of free will amongst the other
machines. And faking it is having it, okay?
That's what Turing tells us all about. Faking intelligence is intelligent
because it's not easy to fake. It's very hard to fake
and you can only fake if you have it.
Yeah, that's such a beautiful statement.
Yeah, you can't fake it if you don't have it.
So let's begin at the beginning with the probability
both philosophically and mathematically. What does it mean to say
the probability of something happening is
50%. What is probability? It's a degree of uncertainty that an agent has
about the world. You're still expressing some knowledge
in that statement? Of course. The probability is 90%.
It's absolutely different kind of knowledge and if it is 10%.
But it's still not solid knowledge? It's solid knowledge.
If you tell me that 90% assurance smoking will give you lung cancer
in five years versus 10%, it's a piece of useful knowledge.
So the statistical view of the universe, why is it useful?
So we're swimming in complete uncertainty, most of everything.
It allows you to predict things with a certain probability
and computing those probabilities are very useful.
That's the whole idea of prediction and you need prediction to be able to
survive. If you can't predict the future then you're
just crossing the street. It will be extremely
fearful. And so you've done a lot of work in causation
and so let's let's think about correlation. I started with the
probability. You started with probability. You've
invented the Bayesian networks and so we'll dance back and forth
between these levels of uncertainty. But what is correlation?
So probability is something happening, it's something,
but then there's a bunch of things happening and sometimes they happen
together, sometimes not, they're independent or not.
So how do you think about correlation of things?
Correlation occurs when two things vary together over a very long time.
There's one way of measuring it or when you have a bunch of variables that
they're all very cohesive. Then because we have a correlation here
and usually when we think about correlation
we really think causally. Things cannot be correlated unless there is a reason
for them to vary together. Why should they vary together?
If they don't see each other why should they vary together?
So underlying it somewhere is causation. Yes.
Hidden in our intuition there is a notion of causation because we cannot grasp
any other logic except causation. And how does conditional probability
differ from causation? So what is conditional probability?
Conditional probability, how things vary, when one of them
stays the same. Now staying the same means that I have chosen to look only
of those incidents where the guy has the same value
as previous one. It's my choice as an experimenter.
So things that are not correlated before could become correlated.
Like for instance if I have two coins which are uncorrelated
and I choose only those flippings experiments in which a bell rings
and a bell rings when at least one of them is a tail.
Then suddenly I see correlation between the two coins
because I only look at the cases where the bell rang.
You see it's my design with my ignorance essentially
with my audacity to ignore certain incidents.
I suddenly create a correlation where it doesn't exist physically.
Right so that's you just outlined one of the flaws
of observing the world and trying to infer something
from the math about the world from looking at the correlation.
I don't look at it as a flaw. The world works like that.
But the flaws come if we try to impose
causal logic on correlation. It doesn't work too well.
I mean but that's exactly what we do. That's what that has been the majority
of science. The majority of naive science.
So the stations know it. The stations know it if you
condition on a third variable then you can destroy
or create correlations among two other variables.
They know it. It's in the data. It's nothing surprising.
That's why they all dismiss the symptom paradox.
Ah we know it. They don't know anything about it.
Well there's there's disciplines like psychology where all the variables are
hard to account for and so oftentimes there's a leap
between correlation to causation. You're you're imposing a leap.
Who is trying to get causation from correlation?
Not you're not proving causation but you're sort of
discussing it implying sort of hypothesizing without ability.
Which discipline do you have in mind? I'll tell you if they are
obsolete or if they are outdated or they are about to get outdated.
Yes. Yeah tell me which one do you have in mind.
Well psychology you know. It's okay what is it SEM?
It's actually equation. No no I was thinking of applied psychology
studying. For example we work with human behavior
and semi autonomous vehicles. How people behave and you have to
conduct these studies of people driving cars.
Everything starts with the question. What is the research question?
What is the research question? The research question. Do people fall asleep
when the car is driving itself? Do they fall asleep or do they tend to fall
asleep more frequently? More frequently. Then the car not driving.
Not driving itself. That's a good question okay.
And so you measure you put people in the car
because it's real world. You can't conduct an experiment where you control
everything. Why can't you? You could. Turn the
automatic module on and off. Because it's on road public.
I mean there's aspects to it that's unethical.
Because it's testing on public roads. So you can only use vehicle.
They have to the people the drivers themselves have to make that choice
themselves. And so they regulate that. And so you just
observe when they drive it autonomously and when they don't.
And then. But maybe they turn it off when they were very tired.
Yeah that's kind of thing. But you you don't know those variables.
Okay so that you have now uncontrolled experiment.
Uncontrolled experiment. We call it observational study.
And we form the correlation detected. We have to infer causal relationship.
Whether it was the automatic piece that caused them to fall asleep.
Oh okay. So that is an issue that is about 120 years old.
Yeah. I should only go 100 years old. Okay.
And oh maybe it's no actually I should say it's 2000 years old.
Because we have this experiment by Daniel.
But the Babylonian king. That wanted the
exile. The people from Israel that were taken
in exile to Babylon to serve the king. He wanted to serve them king's food.
Which was meat and Daniel as a good Jew couldn't
eat a non kosher food. So he asked them to eat vegetarian food.
But the king overseers says I'm sorry but if the king sees that your
performance falls below that of other kids you know he's going to kill me.
Daniel said let's make an experiment. Let's take four of us from Jerusalem.
Okay give us vegetarian food. Let's take the other guys that
to eat the king's food and in about a week's time
we'll test our performance. And you know the answer.
Of course he did the experiment. And they were
so much better than the others. And the kings nominated them
to super position in his king. So it was the first experiment.
Yes. So there was a very simple it's also the same
research questions. We want to know vegetarian food.
Assist or obstruct your your mental ability.
And okay so let's put the question is very old one.
Even the democratic said if I could discover one cause
of things I would rather discuss one cause and be a king of Persia.
The task of discovering causes was in the mind of ancient people
from many many years ago. But the mathematics of doing that
was only developed in the 1920s. So science has left us often.
Okay science has not provided us with the mathematics to capture the idea of
x causes y and y does not cause x. Because all the questions of physics
are symmetrical algebraic. The equality sign goes both ways.
Okay let's look at machine learning. Machine learning today if you look at
deep neural networks you can think of it as
kind of conditional probability estimators.
Beautiful. So where did you say that?
Conditional probability estimators. None of the machine learning people
clubbled you. Attacked you. Listen most people and this is
why this today's conversation I think is interesting is most people would agree
with you. There's certain aspects that are just
effective today but we're going to hit a wall and there's a lot of
ideas. I think you're very right that we're
going to have to return to about causality.
Let's try to explore it. Let's even take a step back.
You've invented Bayesian networks
that look awfully a lot like they express something like causation but they
don't. Not necessarily. So how do we turn
Bayesian networks into expressing causation? How do we build causal networks?
This A causes B, B causes C. How do we start to infer that kind of
thing? We start asking ourselves a question
what are the factors that would determine the value of X? X could be
blood pressure, death, hunger. But these are hypotheses
that we propose. Hypothesis. Everything which has to do with
causality comes from a theory.
The difference is only how you interrogate the theory you have
in your mind. So it still needs the human expert to propose.
Right. You need the human expert to specify
the initial model. Initial model could be very
qualitative. Just who listens to whom? By whom listen to I mean
one variable listen to the other. So I say okay the tide is listening to the
moon and not to the rooster crow.
And so far this is our understanding of the world in which we live.
Scientific understanding of reality. We have to start there.
Because if we don't know how to handle cause and effect
relationship when we do have a model and we certainly do not know how to
handle it when we don't have a model. So let's start first.
In AI slogan is representation first, discovery second.
But if I give you all the information that you need
can you do anything useful with it? That is the first representation.
How do you represent it? I give you all the knowledge in the world. How do you
represent it? When you represent it I ask you
can you infer x or y or z? Can you answer certain queries?
Is it complex? Is it polynomial? All the computer science exercises we do
once you give me a representation for my knowledge.
Then you can ask me now I understand how to represent things. How do I discover
them? At the second everything. So first of all I should echo the
statement that mathematics and the current much of the machine learning
world has not considered causation that A
causes B just in anything. That seems like a
non obvious thing that you think we would have
really acknowledged it but we haven't. So we have to put that on the table.
So knowledge how hard is it to create a knowledge from which
to work? In certain area it's easy because we have
only four or five major variables and an epidemiologist
or an economist can put them down.
Minimum wage, unemployment, policy, x, y, z and start collecting data
and quantify the parameters that were left
unquantified with the initial knowledge. That's the
routine work that you find in experimental psychology,
in economics, everywhere in the health science.
That's a routine thing but I should emphasize you should start with a
research question. What do you want to estimate?
Once you have that you have to have a language of expressing what you want to
estimate. You think it's easy? No. So we can talk about two things. I
think one is how the science of
causation is very useful for
answering certain questions and then the other is how do we create
intelligent systems that need to reason with causation.
So if my research question is how do I pick up this water bottle
from the table? All the knowledge is required to be able to
do that. How do we construct that knowledge base?
Do we return back to the problem that we didn't solve
in the 80s with expert systems? Do we have to solve that problem
of automated construction of knowledge?
You're talking about the task of eliciting knowledge from an export.
Task of eliciting knowledge from an export or the self discovery of
more knowledge, more and more knowledge. So automating the building of
knowledge as much as possible. It's a different game in the causal domain
because it's essentially the same thing. You have to
start with some knowledge and you're trying to
enrich it. But you don't enrich it by asking for more rules. You enrich it by
asking for the data, to look at the data and quantifying
and ask queries that you couldn't answer when you started.
You couldn't because the question is quite complex and it's not
within the capability of ordinary cognition, of
ordinary person or ordinary expert even to answer.
So what kind of questions do you think we can start to answer?
Even a simple one. Suppose I start with an easy one.
What's the effect of a drug on recovery?
What is the aspirin that caused my headache to
be cured or what is the television program
or the good news I received? This is already
a difficult question because it's finding cause from effect.
The easy one is find effects from cause. That's right.
So first you construct a model saying that this is an important research
question. This is an important question. Then you...
I didn't construct a model yet. I just said it's an important question.
And the first exercise is express it mathematically.
What do you want to do? Like if I tell you what will be the effect
of taking this drug? You have to say that in mathematics.
How do you say that? Yes. Can you write down the question? Not the answer.
I want to find the effect of the drug on my headache.
Write it down. That's where the do calculus comes in.
Yes. Do operator. What do you do operator? Do operator.
Which is nice. It's the difference between association and intervention.
Very beautifully sort of constructed. Yeah. So we have a do operator.
So do calculus connected on the do operator itself connects
the operation of doing to something that we can see.
Right. So as opposed to the purely observing
you're making the choice to change a variable. That's what it expresses.
And then the way that we interpret it
and the mechanism by which we take your query
and we translate it into something that we can work with
is by giving it semantics. Saying that you have a model of the world
and you cut off all the incoming error into x
and you're looking now in the modified mutilated model
you ask for the probability of y. That is interpretation of doing x.
Because by doing things you liberate them
from all influences that acted upon them
earlier and you subject them to the tyranny of your muscles.
So you remove all the questions about causality by doing them.
So there's one level of questions. Yeah.
Answer questions about what will happen if you do things. If you do. If you drink
the coffee or if you take the asthma. Right.
So how do we get the doing data?
Now the question is if we cannot run experiments.
Right. Then we have to rely on observational study.
So first we could start to interrupt. We could run an experiment
where we do something. Where we drink the coffee and don't. And this
the the do operator allows you to sort of be systematic about expressing.
To imagine how the experiment will look like even though we cannot
physically and technologically conduct it. I'll give you an example.
What is the effect of blood pressure on mortality?
I cannot go down into your vein and change your blood pressure.
But I can ask the question. Which means I can even have a model of your body.
I can imagine the effect of your how the blood pressure
change will affect your mortality. How I go into the model and I conduct this
surgery about the blood pressure. Even though
physically I can do I cannot do it. Let me ask the quantum mechanics question.
Does the doing change the observation? Meaning the surgery of changing the
blood pressure is I mean no the surgery is
very delicate. Very delicate. Incisive and delicate.
Which means do x means I'm going to touch only x.
Directly into x. So that means that I change only things which
depends on x by virtue of x changing. But I don't depend
things which are not depends on x. Like I wouldn't
change your sex or your age. I just change your blood pressure.
So in the case of blood pressure it may be difficult or impossible to construct
such an experiment. No physically yes but hypothetically
no. If we have a model that is what the model is for.
So you conduct surgeries on a model you take it apart put it back
that's the idea of a model. It's the idea of thinking counter factually
imagining and that's the idea of creativity.
So by constructing that model you can start to infer
if the higher the blood pressure leads to mortality
which increases or decreases. I construct the model I can still
not answer it. I have to see if I have enough information in the model that
would allow me to find out the effects of intervention
from a noninterventional study from observation hands off study.
So what's needed? We need to have assumptions about who
affects whom. If the if the graph had a certain property
the answer is yes you can get it from observational study.
If the graph is too messy bushy bushy the answer is no you cannot.
Then you need to find either different kind of observation that you haven't
considered or one experiment. So basically does that
that puts a lot of pressure on you to encode wisdom into that graph?
Correct. But you don't have to encode
more than what you know. God forbid if you put the like economists are doing that
they call identifying assumptions they put assumptions even they don't
prevail in the world they put assumptions so they can
identify things. But the problem is yes beautifully put but the problem is you
don't know what you don't know. So you know what you don't know because
if you don't know you say it's possible it's possible
that x affect the traffic tomorrow. It's possible you put down an error
which says it's possible every error in the graph
says it's possible. So there's not a significant cost to adding
errors that the more error you add the better the less
likely you are to identify things from purely
observational data. So if the whole world is bushy
and everybody affects everybody else
the answer is you can answer it ahead of time
I cannot answer my query from observational data I have to go to
experiments. So you talk about machine learning
is essentially learning by association or reasoning by association
and this due calculus is allowing for intervention
I like that word but action. So you also talk about counterfactuals
and trying to sort of understand the difference in counterfactuals and
intervention what's the first what is counterfactuals and
why are they useful why are they especially useful as
opposed to just reasoning what what affect actions have.
What kind of factual contains what we normally call explanations.
Can you give an example of a counterfactual? If I tell you that
acting one way affects something I didn't explain anything yet
but if I if I ask you was it the aspirin that cure my headache
I'm asking for explanation what cure my headache
and putting a finger on aspirin
provide explanation it was aspirin it was responsible
for your headache going away if if you didn't take the aspirin you would
still have a headache. So by by saying if I didn't take
aspirin I would have a headache you're thereby saying
that aspirin is the thing that removes the headache.
Yes but you have to have another important information
I took the aspirin and my headache is gun
it's very important information now I'm reasoning backward
and I said what is the aspirin yeah by considering what would have happened
if everything else is the same but I didn't take aspirin that's right so you
know that things took place you know Joe killed Schmo
and Schmo would be alive had John not used his gun
okay so that is the counterfactual it had a conflict
it has a conflict here or clash between
observed fact that he he did shoot okay and the hypothetical
predicate which says had he not shot you have a clash
logical clash they cannot exist together that's the counterfactual and that
is the source of our explanation of our the idea of responsibility
regret and free will yeah so it certainly seems
that's the highest level of reasoning right yes and philis is do it all the
time who does it all the time physicist physicist
in every equation of physics let's say you have a hook's law
and you put one kilogram on the spring and the spring is
one meter and you say had this weight been two
kilogram the spring would have been twice as long
it's no problem for physicists to say that
accepted mathematics is only is in the form of equation
okay equating the weight proportionality constant and the length of the
string so you don't have the asymmetry in the
equation of physics although every physicist things counterfactually
ask high school kids had the weight been three kilograms
what will be the length of the spring they can answer it immediately
because they do the counterfactual processing in their mind
and then they put it into equation algebraic equation
and they solve it okay but the robot cannot do that
how do you make a robot learn these relationships and why you would learn
suppose you tell him can you do it so before you go learning
yeah you have to ask yourself suppose that gives more information
can the robot perform a task that i asked him to perform
can he reason and say no it wasn't the aspirin it was the good news you
received on the phone right because well
unless the robot had a model a causal model of the world
right right i'm sorry i have to linger on this but now we have to linger and we
have to say how do we how do we do it how do we build
yes how do we build a causal model without a team of human experts
running around why don't you go to learning right away
you're too much involved with learning because i like babies babies learn fast
i forgot how they do it good yeah that's another question
how do the babies come out with the counterfactual model of the world
and babies do that yeah they know how to play with
in the crib they know which balls hits another one
and so they learn it by playful manipulation of the world
yes there's a simple world involved only toys and balls and chimes
but it's a if you think about it's a complex world
we take for granted uh how complicated and kids do it by
playful manipulation plus parent guidance pure wisdom and he'll say
they meet each other can they say you you shouldn't have taken my toy
right but and they these multiple sources of
information they're able to integrate yeah so the challenge is about how to
integrate how to form these causal
relationship from different sources of data correct
so how how how much is the information is it to play how much causal
information is required to be able to play in the crib
with different objects i don't know i haven't
experimented with the crib okay not a crib picking up
it's a very interesting manipulating physical objects on this very
opening the pages of a book all the tasks the physical manipulation tasks
do you have a sense because my sense is the world is extremely complicated
it's extremely complicated i agree and i don't know how to organize it because
i've been spoiled by easy problems such as
cancer and death okay first we have to start
no but it's easy the easy in the sense that you have only
20 variables and they are just variables are not mechanics
okay it's easy you just put them on the graph and they
they speak to you yeah and you you're providing a methodology for
letting them speak yeah i'm working only in the abstract
the abstract knowledge in knowledge out data in between
now can we take a leap to try and to learn
in this very when it's not 20 variables but 20 million variables
trying to learn causation in this world not learn but
somehow construct models i mean it seems like you would only have
be able to learn because constructing it manually
would be too difficult do you have ideas of
i think it's a matter of combining simple models
for many many sources for many many disciplines
and many metaphors metaphors are the basics of human intelligence basis
yeah so how do you think of about a metaphor in terms of its use in human
intelligence metaphors is an expert system
an expert it's mapping problem
with which you are not familiar to a problem with which you are familiar
like i give you a good example the greek believed that the sky is an opaque
shell it's not really a space infinite space
it's an opaque shell and the stars are holes
poked in the shells through which you see the eternal light
it was a metaphor why because they understand how you poke holes in the
shells okay they're not they were not familiar with
infinite space okay and so and we are walking on a
shell of a turtle and if you get too close to the edge you're gonna fall down
to Hades or whatever yeah and that's a metaphor
it's not true but this kind of metaphor enables Aristoteles
to measure the radius of the earth because he said come on if we are
walking on a turtle shell then a ray of light
coming to this angle will be different this place
will be different angle that's coming to this place i know the distance i'll
measure the two angles and then i have the radius of the shell of the
of the turtle okay and he did and he found his measurements
were very close to the measurements we have today
through the year what six thousand and seven hundred
seven hundred kilometers of the earth that's something that would not occur
to Babylonian astronomer even though the Babylonian experiments
were the machine learning people of the time
they fit curves and they could predict the
eclipse of the moon much more accurately than the Greek
because they fit curve okay that's a different metaphor
something that you're familiar with a game a turtle shell okay
what does it mean if you are familiar familiar means that answers to certain
questions are explicit you don't have to derive them
and they were made explicit because somewhere in the past
you've constructed a model of that you're familiar with so the child is
familiar with billiard balls yes so the child could predict that if
you let loose of one ball the other one will bounce off
these are you obtain that by familiarity familiarity is answering
questions and you store the answer explicitly
you don't have to derive them so this is idea for metaphor
all our life all our intelligence is built around metaphors
mapping from the unfamiliar to the familiar but
the marriage between the two is a tough thing which i
which we haven't been able to algorithmize so you think of that
process of because of using metaphor to leap from one place to another
we can call it reasoning is it a kind of reasoning
it is reasoning by metaphor metaphor for metaphor do you
think of that as learning so learning is a popular terminology today in a
narrow sense it is it is it is definitely a
so you may not okay right one of the most important
learning taking something which theoretically is drivable
and store it in accessible format i'll give an example chess
okay finding winning winning starting moving chess
is hard but uh it is there is an answer
either there is a winning move for white or there isn't or there is a draw
okay so it is the answer to that is available for the rule of the games
but we don't know the answer so what does the chess master have that we don't
have he has stored explicitly an evaluation of
certain complex pattern of the board we don't have it
ordinary people like me i don't know about you
i'm not a chess master so for me i have to derive
yes things that for him is explicit he has seen it before
or you've seen the pattern before or similar pattern you see metaphor
yeah and he generalized and said don't move is a dangerous move
it's just that's not in the game of chess but in the game of
billiard balls we humans are able to initially derive very effectively and
then reasoned by metaphor very effectively and make it look so easy
and it makes one wonder how hard is it to build it in a machine
so in your sense how far away are we to be able to construct
i don't know i'm not a futurist i can all i can tell you is
that we are making tremendous progress in the causal reasoning
a domain something that i even dare to call it revolution
the causal revolution because what we have achieved in the past
three decades is something that
dwarf everything that was derived in the entire
history so there's an excitement about current machine learning
methodologies and there's really important good work you're doing
in causal inference where do the word what is the future
where do these worlds collide and what does that look like
first they're gonna work without collisions
it's gonna work in harmony harmony it's not the human is going to
to jumpstart the exercise by providing qualitative
noncommitting models of how the universe works
how in reality the domain of discourse
works the machine is going to take over from that point of view
and derive whatever the calculus says can be derived
namely quantitative answer to our questions
these are complex questions i'll give you some example of complex question
that will bugle your mind if you think about it
you take result of studies in diverse population under diverse condition
and you may infer the cause effect of a new population which doesn't even
resemble any of the one studied and you do that
by do calculus you do that by generalizing from one study to another
see what's what's common with Beato what is different
let's ignore the differences and pull out the commonality
and you do it over maybe a hundred hospitals
around the world from that you can get really
mileage from big data it's not only you have many samples
you have many sources of data so that that's a really powerful thing
i think for especially for medical applications i mean
cure cancer right that's how from data you can cure cancer
so we're talking about causation which is the temporal
temporal relationships between things not only temporal it was structural and
temporal temporal enough temporal presence by
itself cannot replace causation is temporal precedence
the error of time in physics it's important it's necessary
it's important yes is it yes i never seen cause
propagate backward but if we call if we use the word
cause but there's relationships that are timeless
i suppose that's still forward in the era of time but
the are there relationships logical relationships
that fit into the structure
sure the whole do calculate this logical relationship
that doesn't require a temporal it has just a condition that
it's you're not traveling back in time yes
correct so it's really a generalization of
a powerful generalization uh of what boolean logic yeah boolean logic
yes that is sort of simply put and allows us to
uh you know reason reason about the order of events the source the
not about between we're not deriving the order of event
we are given cause effects relationship okay
they ought to be obeying the the time precedence relationship
we are given that and now that we ask questions about
other causal relationship that could be derived from the
initial ones but were not given to us explicitly
yeah like the case of the firing squad i give you
in the first chapter and i ask what if rifleman a decline to shoot
would the prisoners still be dead
to decline to shoot it means that disobey order
and the the rule of the games where that he is a
obedient and marksman okay that's how you start that's the initial
order but now you ask question about breaking the rules
what if he decided not to pull the trigger he just became a pacifist
and you can you and i can answer that the other rifleman would have
killed him okay i want the machine to do that
is it so hard to ask machine to do that it's just a simple task
but if they have a calculus for that yes yeah
but the curiosity the natural curiosity for me is
that yes you're absolutely correct and important
and it's hard to believe that we haven't done this
seriously extensively already a long time ago so this
this is really important work but i also want to know
you know this maybe you can philosophize about how hard is it to learn
okay let's assume a learning we want to learn it okay want to learn so what do
we do we put a learning machine that watches execution
trials in many countries and many
locations okay all the machine can learn is to see
shot or not shot dead not dead a court issued an order or didn't okay just the
facts from the fact you don't know who listens to
home you don't know that the condemned person
listen to the bullets that the bullets are listening to the
captain okay all we hear is one command two shots dead okay a
triple of variable yes no yes no okay when that you can learn who
listens to whom and you can answer the question no
definitively no but don't you think you can start proposing ideas for humans to
review you want machine to learn right you want a robot
so robot is watching trials like that 200 trials
and then he has to answer the question what if rifleman a
refrain from shooting yeah so how to do that
that's exactly my point at looking at the facts don't give you the strings
behind the facts absolutely but do you think of machine learning
as it's currently defined as only something that looks at the facts
and tries right now they only look at the facts yeah so is there a way to
modify yeah in your sense playful manipulation
playful manipulation yes doing the interventionist kind of things
intervention but it could be at random for instance the
rifleman is sick that day or he just vomits or whatever so
machine can observe this unexpected event which
introduced noise the noise still have to be
random to be able to and related to randomized experiment
and then you have a observational studies from which to infer the strings
behind the facts it's doable to a certain extent
but now that we expert in what you can do
once you have a model we can reason back and say what you kind of data you need
to build a model got it so i know you're not a futurist
but are you excited have you when you look back at your life
long for the idea of creating a human level intelligence system yeah
i'm driven by that all my life i'm driven just by one thing
but i go slowly i go from what i know to the next step incrementally
so without imagining what the end goal looks like do you imagine
what the end goal is going to be a machine
that can answer sophisticated questions counterfactuals of regret
compassion responsibility and free will
so what is a good test is a touring test
a reasonable test free will doesn't exist yet
there's no how would you test free will and that's so far we know only one
thing many if robots can communicate
with reward and punishment among themselves
and hitting each other on the wrist and say you shouldn't have done that
okay um playing better soccer because they can do that
what do you mean because they can do that because they can communicate among
themselves because of the communication they can do
because they communicate like us reward and punishment
yes you didn't pass the ball the right the right time
and so for therefore you're going to sit on the bench for the next two
if they start communicating like that the question is will they play better
soccer as opposed to what as opposed to what they do now
without this ability to reason about reward and punishment
responsibility and I can only think about communication
communication is and in not necessarily natural language but just
communication just communication and that's important to have a quick
and effective means of communicating knowledge
if the coach tells you you should have passed the ball pink
he conveys so much knowledge to you as opposed to what
go down and change your software that's the alternative
but the coach doesn't know your software so how can his coach tell you
you should have passed the ball but that our language is very effective you
should have passed the ball you know your software
you tweak the right module okay and next time you don't do it
now that's for playing soccer or the rules are well defined
no they're not well defined when you should pass the ball is not well
defined no it's a it's very soft very noisy
yes you have to do it under pressure it's art
but in terms of aligning values between computers and humans
do you think this cause and effect type of thinking is important to align the
values values morals ethics under which the
machines make decisions is is the cause effect where
the two can come together cause effect is necessary component
to build a ethical machine because the machine has to empathize
to understand what's good for you to build a model of your
of you as a recipient which should be very much what what is compassion
they imagine that you suffer pain as much as me as much as me
i do have already a model of myself right so it's very easy for me to map
you to mine i don't have to rebuild the model
it's much easier to say oh you're like me okay therefore i would not hate you
and the machine has to imagine it has to try to fake to be human essentially so
you can imagine that you're that you're like me
right and well who is me that's the fact that that's consciousness
they have a model of yourself where do you get this model you look at yourself
as if you are a part of the environment if you build a model of yourself
versus the environment then you can say i need to have a model of myself
i have abilities i have desires and so forth okay
i have a blueprint of myself well not the full detail because i cannot
get the halting problem but i have a blueprint
so on that level of a blueprint i can modify things
i can look at myself in the mirror and say if i change this more tweak this
model i'm going to perform differently
that is what we mean by free will and consciousness
what do you think is consciousness uh is it simply self awareness so
including yourself into the model of the world that's right that
some people tell me no this is only part of consciousness and then they start
telling me what they really mean by consciousness and i lose them
yeah for me consciousness is having a blueprint of your software
do you have concerns about the future of ai all the different trajectories of
all of our research yes um where's your hope where the
movement has where your concerns i'm concerned
because i know we are building a new species
that has the capability of exceeding our exceeding us
exceeding our capabilities and can breathe itself
and take over the world absolutely it's a new
species that is uncontrolled we don't know the degree to which we control it
we don't even understand what it means to be able to control this new
species so i'm concerned i don't have anything to add
to that because it's such a gray area that's unknown
it never happened in history yeah the only the only time it happened in
history was evolution with human being
it wasn't very successful was it some people says it was a great success
for us it was but a few people along the way
our few creatures along the way would not agree
so uh so it's just because it's such a gray area there's nothing else to say
we have a sample of one sample of one it's us
but some people would look at you and say yeah but we were looking to you
to help us make sure that sample two works out okay actually we have more than
a sample of more we have theories theories
and that's good we don't need to be statisticians
so sample of one doesn't mean any poverty of knowledge it's not
sample of one plus theory conjectural theory
of what could happen yeah that we do have
but i i really feel helpless in contributing to this argument
because i know so little and and my imagination is limited
and i know how much i don't know and i but i'm concerned
you're born and raised in israel born raised in israel yes and uh later
served in um israel military defense forces in the in the israel defense force
yeah what did you learn from that experience for this experience
there's a kibbutz in there as well yes because i was in a nachal which is a
combination of agricultural work and military service
we were supposed i was really idealist i wanted to
be a member of the kibbutz throughout my life
and to live a communal life and uh so i prepared myself for that
slowly slowly i want the greater challenge so that's a far world away
both but i learned from that what i can it was a miracle
it was a miracle that i served in the 1950s
i i don't know how we survived the country was under austerity
it tripled its population from 600 000 to a million point eight when i finished
college no one who went hungry austerity yes
when you wanted to buy uh to make an omelette
in a restaurant you had to bring your own egg
and the the imprisoned people from bringing food from the
from farming from the villages to the city but no one went hungry and i
always add to it and
higher education did not suffer any budget cuts
they still invested in me in my wife in our generation to get the best
education that they could okay so i'm really
grateful for the opportunity and i'm trying to pay back now okay
it's a miracle that we survived the war of 1948
they were so close to a second genocide it was all in plant
but we survived it by miracle and then the second miracle that not many people
talk about the next phase how no one went hungry
and the country managed to triple its population
you know it means to imagine united states going from what 350 million
to yeah and believe this is a really
tense part of the world it's a complicated part of the world
israel and all around yes so religion is is um at the core of that complexity
or one of the components religion is a strong motivating course to many many
people in the middle east yes in your view
looking back is religion good for society
that's a good question for robotic you know
there's echoes of that question equip robot with religious belief
suppose we we find out or we agree that religion is good to you to keep you in
in line okay should we give the robot the
metaphor of a god as a matter of fact the robot will get it without us
also why but the robot will reason by metaphor
and what is the most primitive metaphor a child grows with
mother smile father teaching father image and mother image that's god
so you want it or not the robot will
well assuming assuming that the robot is going to have a mother and a father
it may only have a programmer which doesn't supply warmth
and discipline discipline it does so the robot will have this a model of the
trainer and everything that happens in the world cosmology and so is going to
be mapped into the programmer that's god man
the the thing that represents the origin of
everything for that robot the most primitive relationship
so it's going to arrive there by metaphor and so the the question is if
overall that metaphor has served us well as humans I really don't know
I think it did but as long as you keep in mind it's only a metaphor
so if you think we can can we talk about your son
yes yes can you tell his story a story well Daniel
story is known is was abducted in Pakistan by al Qaeda driven sect and
under various pretenses I don't even pay attention to what the pretence will
originally they wanted to have to have in the United States
deliver some promised airplanes there it was all made up and all this
demands were bogus I don't know really but
eventually he was executed in front of a camera
at the core of that is hate and intolerance
at the core yes absolutely yes we don't really appreciate
the depth of the hate at which
which billions of peoples are educated
we don't understand it I just listened recently
to what they teach you in Mogadishu
when when the water stopped in the tap
we knew exactly who did it the Jews the Jews we didn't know how
but we knew who did it we don't appreciate what it means to us
the depth is unbelievable do you think
all of us are capable of evil
and the education the indoctrination is really what we are capable of evil if
you're indoctrinated sufficiently long and in depth
we are capable of ISIS we are capable of Nazism
yes we are but the question is whether we after we have
gone through some Western education and we learned that everything is really
relative it is no absolute God
it's only a belief in God whether we are capable now
of being transformed under certain circumstances
to become brutal yeah that is a I'm worried about it
because some people say yes given the right circumstances
given economical bad economical crisis okay you are
capable of doing it too and that's worries me I
I want to believe it I'm not capable this seven years after Daniel's death he
wrote an article at the Wall Street Journal titled Daniel
Parle on the normalization of evil yes what was your message a message back then
and how did it change today over over the years
I I lost what was the message the message was that
we are not treating terrorism as a taboo we are treating it as a bargaining
device that is accepted people have grievance
and they go and and bomb restaurants okay it's normal look you're even not
not surprised when I tell you that 20 years ago you said what for
grievance you go and blow a restaurant
today it's becoming normalized the banalization of evil
and we have created that to ourselves by normalizing by
by making it part of
political life it's a political debate every
terrorist yesterday becomes a freedom fighter today and tomorrow it's becoming
terrorist again it's switchable all right and so we should call out evil when
there's evil if we don't want to be part of it
becoming if you want yeah if we want to separate
good from evil that's one of the first thing that
what would they in the garden of Eden remember the first thing
that god tell them was hey you want some knowledge here's a tree of good and evil
so this evil touched your life personally
does your heart have anger sadness or is it hope
okay I see some beautiful people coming from
Pakistan I see beautiful people everywhere but I see
horrible propagation of evil in this country too
it shows you how populistic slogans can catch the mind of the best
intellectuals today's father's day I didn't know that yeah what's uh what's
what's uh fond memory you have of Daniel
or many good memories uh immense he was my mentor
he had
sense of balance that I didn't have
yeah he saw the beauty in every person
he was not as emotional as I am more
looking things in perspective he really liked every person he really
grew up with the idea that a foreigner is a reason for curiosity
not for fear it's one time we went in Berkeley
and homeless came out from some dark alley
and said hey man can you spare a dime I retreated
back you know two feet back and then I just hugged him and say here's a dime
enjoy yourself maybe you want some
money to take a bath or whatever where did he get it
not for me do you have advice for young minds today dreaming
about creating as you have dreamt creating
intelligent systems what is the best way to arrive at new breakthrough
ideas and carry them through the fire of criticism and
and past conventional ideas ask your questions
really your questions are never dumb
and solve them your own way okay and don't take no for an answer
look if they are really dumb you will find out quickly
by trying an arrow to see that they're not leading any place
but follow them and try to understand things your way
that is my advice I don't know if it's going to help anyone
now there's brilliantly there is a lot of
it's the inertia in science in academia it is slowing down science
yeah those two words your way that's a powerful thing
it's against inertia potentially against the flow against your professor
against your professor I wrote the book of why
in order to democratize common sense
in order to instill rebellious spirit in students so they wouldn't wait for
until the professor gets things right
as you wrote the manifesto of the rebellion against the professor
against the professor yes so looking back at your life of research
what ideas do you hope ripple through the next many decades
what what do you hope your legacy will be
I already have a tombstone
carved oh boy and the fundamental law of
counterfactuals that's what it's a it's a simple equation
what a counterfactual in terms of a model surgery
that's it because everything follows from that
if you get that all the rest I can die in peace
and my student can derive all my knowledge
my mother mother means the rest follows yeah
yeah thank you so much for talking today I really appreciate it thank you for
being so attentive and instigating
we did it we did the coffee helped thanks for listening to this conversation
with jadea pearl and thank you to our presenting sponsor cash app
download it use code lex podcast you'll get ten dollars
and ten dollars will go to first a STEM education nonprofit
that inspires hundreds of thousands of young minds
to learn and to dream of engineering our future
if you enjoy this podcast subscribe on youtube give it five stars on apple
podcast support on patreon or simply connect with me
on twitter and now let me leave you some words of wisdom
from jadea pearl you cannot answer a question that you cannot ask
and you cannot ask a question you have no words for
thank you for listening and hope to see you next time